\input texinfo.tex @c -*- Mode: Texinfo -*-
@headings doubleafter
@setfilename milcv6.info
@settitle The MILC Code (version: 6.20sep02)
@footnotestyle end
@c @setchapternewpage off

@ignore
 c milcv6.texi -- texinfo source for MILC code documentation
 c Copyright (C) 2002 The MILC Collaboration
 c Contact: <jhetrick@uop.edu> or <doug@physics.arizona.edu>
 c
 c  to compile: texi2dvi milcv6.texi, texi2html milcv6.texi
 c $Id: milcv6.texi,v 1.1 2005/02/23 00:04:49 detar Exp $
 c
 c $Log: milcv6.texi,v $
 c Revision 1.1  2005/02/23 00:04:49  detar
 c Initial revision
 c
@end ignore

@ifinfo
@node Top, Obtaining the MILC Code, (dir), (dir)
@top The MILC Code
@center The MILC Code 
@center v. 6.20sep02
@sp 1
@center @strong{Claude Bernard} (@emph{Washington U.}) <cb@@lump.wustl.edu>
@center @strong{Tom Burch} (@emph{U. of Arizona}) <tburch@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu>
@center @strong{Tom DeGrand} (@emph{U. of Colorado}) <degrand@@aurinko.colorado.edu>
@center @strong{Carleton DeTar} (@emph{U. of Utah}) <detar@@mail.physics.utah.edu>
@center @strong{Steve Gottlieb} (@emph{Indiana U.}) <sg@@denali.physics.indiana.edu>
@center @strong{Urs Heller} (@emph{SCRI}) <heller@@csit.fsu.edu,>
@center @strong{James Hetrick} (@emph{U. of the Pacific}) <jhetrick@@uop.edu>
@center @strong{Craig McNeile} (@emph{Liverpool U.}) <mcneile@@amtp.liv.ac.uk>
@center @strong{Kostas Orginos} (@emph{Brookhaven Natl. Lab}) <kostas@@bnl.gov>
@center @strong{James Osborn} (@emph{U. of Utah}) <osborn@@physics.utah.edu>
@center @strong{Kari Rummukainen} (@emph{Niels Bohr Institute}) <rummukai@@nbi.dk>
@center @strong{Bob Sugar} (@emph{U.C. Santa Barbara}) <sugar@@sarek.physics.ucsb.edu>
@center @strong{Doug Toussaint} (@emph{U. of Arizona}) <doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu>

The MILC Code is a body of high performance research software written in C
 for doing
SU(3)  lattice gauge theory on several different (MIMD)
parallel computers in current use. In scalar mode, it runs on a variety
of workstations making it extremely versatile for both production and
exploratory applications. It has gone through various stages
of development. This manual is for the latest (version 6.20sep02) version
of the code. Currently supported code runs on:
@itemize @bullet
@item Most scalar machines ("vanilla" version)
@item SGI Origin 2000
@item IBM SP
@item NT clusters
@item Compaq Sierra Cluster
@item and various Beowulf (Linux+MPI) clusters
@end itemize
This is a @TeX{}info document; an HTML version is accessible at:
@itemize 
@item http://www.physics.utah.edu/~detar/milc/
@end itemize


@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@center @titlefont{The MILC Code}
@sp 1

@center version ---6.20sep02---
@sp 1
@center @strong{Claude Bernard} (@emph{Washington U.}) <cb@@lump.wustl.edu>
@center @strong{Tom Burch} (@emph{U. of Arizona}) <tburch@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu>
@center @strong{Tom DeGrand} (@emph{U. of Colorado}) <degrand@@aurinko.colorado.edu>
@center @strong{Carleton DeTar} (@emph{U. of Utah}) <detar@@mail.physics.utah.edu>
@center @strong{Steve Gottlieb} (@emph{Indiana U.}) <sg@@denali.physics.indiana.edu>
@center @strong{Urs Heller} (@emph{SCRI}) <heller@@csit.fsu.edu,>
@center @strong{James Hetrick} (@emph{U. of the Pacific}) <jhetrick@@uop.edu>
@center @strong{Craig McNeile} (@emph{Liverpool U.}) <mcneile@@amtp.liv.ac.uk>
@center @strong{Kostas Orginos} (@emph{UBrookhaven Natl. Lab}) <kostas@@bln.gov>
@center @strong{James Osborn} (@emph{U. of Utah}) <osborn@@physics.utah.edu>
@center @strong{Kari Rummukainen} (@emph{Niels Bohr Institute}) <rummukai@@nbi.dk>
@center @strong{Bob Sugar} (@emph{U.C. Santa Barbara}) <sugar@@sarek.physics.ucsb.edu>
@center @strong{Doug Toussaint} (@emph{U. of Arizona}) <doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu>



The MILC Code is a body of high performance research software written in C
 for doing SU(3) lattice gauge theory on several different (MIMD)
parallel computers in current use. In scalar mode, it runs on a variety
of workstations making it extremely versatile for both production and
exploratory applications.  Currently supported code runs on:
@itemize @bullet
@item Most scalar machines ("vanilla" version)
@item SGI Origin 2000
@item IBM SP
@item NT Clusters
@item Compaq Sierra cluster
@item and various Beowulf (Linux+MPI) clusters
@end itemize
@ifinfo
This is a @TeX{}info document; an HTML version is accessible at:
@end ifinfo
@itemize
@item http://www.physics.utah.edu/~detar/milc/
@item http://physics.indiana.edu/~sg/milc.html
@item http://cliodhna.cop.uop.edu/~hetrick/milc/
@end itemize
At present there is no special accommodation for parallel architectures
with multiple share-memory processors (SMP) on a node.  Each processor
is treated as though it is a separate node, requiring a communications
operation to exchange data, regardless of whether data is in commonly
shared memory or truly off node.  Throughout this documentation ``node''
is therefore synonymous with ``processor.''

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@cindex Copyright
Copyright @copyright{} 2000, by The MILC Collaboration

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@cindex Last change
@c ************************** LAST CHANGE *****************************
@*Last change: [detar:08 31 2002]
@c ********************************************************************
@end titlepage

@menu
* Obtaining the MILC Code::
* Building the MILC Code::
* General description::
* Overview of applications::
* Programming with MILC Code::
* Writing Your Own Application::
* Precision::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Obtaining the MILC Code, Building the MILC Code, Top, Top
@chapter Obtaining the MILC Code
@cindex Obtaining the MILC Code

This chapter explains how to get the code, copyright conditions and the
installation process.

@menu
* Web sites::
* Usage conditions::
* Installing the MILC Code::
* Portability::
* SciDAC Support::
* Supported architectures::
@end menu

@node Web sites, Usage conditions, Obtaining the MILC Code, Obtaining the MILC Code
@section Web sites
@cindex  Web sites
@cindex MILC Homepage

The most up-to-date information and access to the MILC Code can be found

@itemize @bullet  
@item via WWW at: 
@itemize
@item @kbd{http://physics.indiana.edu/~sg/milc.html}
@item @kbd{http://physics.utah.edu/~detar/milc/}
@end itemize

@item via email request to the authors' representatives at: 
@itemize
@item @kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu}
@item @kbd{detar@@physics.utah.edu}
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Usage conditions, Installing the MILC Code, Web sites, Obtaining the MILC Code
@section Usage conditions
@cindex Usage conditions
@cindex Free Software Foundation
@cindex GNU General Public License

The MILC Code is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation.

@strong{Publications of research work done using this code or
derivatives of this code should acknowledge its use.} The MILC project
is supported in part by grants for the US Department of Energy and
National Science Foundation and we ask that you use (at least) the
following string in publications which derive results using this
material: 
@sp 1

@dfn{This work was in part based on the MILC
collaboration's public lattice gauge theory code. See
@strong{http://physics.utah.edu/~detar/milc.html}}
@sp 1

This software is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
without any warranty; without even the implied warranty of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. See the GNU
General Public License for more details, a copy of which License can be
obtained from
@example
Free Software Foundation, Inc., 
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@end example

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

@node Installing the MILC Code, Portability, Usage conditions, Obtaining the MILC Code
@section Installing the MILC Code
@cindex Installing the MILC Code

The major code sections are currently bundled into several tar files,
which are, in turn, wrapped into a single compressed tar file.  Start
unpacking in a clean directory using the command
@example
    tar -xzf milc*.tar.gz
@end example
or, if your version of tar doesn't have the @kbd{z} uncompress option,
use
@example
   gzip -dc milc*.tar.gz | tar -xf -
@end example
You should then find a @kbd{README_UNPACK} file or
@kbd{README_UNPACK_RELEASE} file that explains how to complete the
unpacking.  The procedure for building the MILC code is explained later
in this document (@pxref{Building the MILC Code}) or in the @kbd{README}
file that accompanies the code.

@node Portability, SciDAC Support, Installing the MILC Code, Obtaining the MILC Code
@section Portability
@cindex Portability
@cindex Installing the Code

One of our aims in writing this code was to make it very portable
across machine architectures and configurations. While the code must
be compiled with the architecture-specific low-level communication
files (@pxref{Building the MILC Code}), the application codes contain
a minimum of architecture-dependent @strong{#ifdef}'s, which now are
mostly for machine-dependent performance optimizations in the
conjugate gradient routines, etc, since MPI has become a portable
standard.

Similarly, with regard to random numbers, care has been taken to ensure
convenience and reproducibility. With @strong{SITERAND} set
(@pxref{Random numbers}), the random number generator will produce
the same sequence for a given seed, across architectures and
varying the number of nodes.

@node SciDAC Support, Supported architectures, Portability, Obtaining the MILC Code
@cindex SciDAC

The software component of the U.S. Department of Energy SciDAC
project, currently under development, will provide a multilayer
interface for lattice gauge theory code that provides portability even
to specialized platforms, such as the Columbia University QCDOC.  This
release of the MILC code achieves minimal portability through optional
access to the SciDAC message passing interface.

@node Supported architectures,, SciDAC Support,  Obtaining the MILC Code
@section Supported architectures
@cindex Supported architectures
This manual covers @strong{version 6.20sep02} which is currently supposed to
run on: 
@sp 1
@itemize @bullet
@item Most scalar machines ("vanilla" version)
@item SGI Origin 2000
@item IBM SP
@item NT Clusters
@item Compaq Alpha Clusters
@item and various Beowulf (Linux+MPI) clusters
@item QCDOC
@end itemize

In addition it has run in the past on
@itemize @bullet
@item The Intel iPSC-860
@item Intel Paragon
@item PVM (version 3.2)
@item The Ncube 2
@item The Thinking Machines CM5
@item SGI/Cray T3E
@end itemize
and many other long gone (but not forgotten) computers.

@cindex Optimized versions
If you have a machine which is not listed above, or would like specific
information about a particular workstation, write to
@kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu}. It is quite possible that code
for your machine is in developement, or that certain routines for your
workstation have been optimized.

@cindex bugs reports
@cindex questions to the authors
Since this is our working code, it is continually in a state of
development.  We informally support the code as best we can by answering
questions and fixing bugs.  We will be very grateful for reports of
problems and suggestions for improvements, which may be sent to
@example
doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu
detar@@physics.utah.edu
@end example

@node Building the MILC Code, General description, Obtaining the MILC Code, Top
@chapter Building the MILC Code
@cindex Building the code

@cindex architecture specific Makefiles
@cindex Makefiles

Here are the steps required to build the code.
@enumerate
@item Select the application you wish to build
@item Select the architecture-dependent make file.

From the top-level directory choose one of the following
@file{Make_<arch>} files appropriate to the architecture.
@example
Make_vanilla (for scalar mode on workstations and PC's) 
Make_SGIPC_mpi
Make_linux_mpi
Make_linux_qmp (for SciDAC QMP message passing )
Make_now_mpi
Make_nt_mpi
Make_origin_mpi
Make_t3e_mpi
Make_tcs_mpi (Compaq Alpha cluster)
@end example
@item Copy and edit the makefile.

Copy the architecture-dependent make file to the application directory
and edit the compilation options according to your system environment.
This file also defines a special @file{Make_<arch>} file for the libraries.
The libraries make file is @emph{not} the same as the application make file.
While the make file for the library is preset to correspond to the make file
for the application, see the next section to check for compatibility.
@item Edit the @file{configure.h} file in the @file{include} directory.

At the moment we do not run an automated configure to get information
about the system environment.
@item Select a make target

The generic @file{Make_template} file in the application directory
lists a variety of targets followed by a double colon @kbd{::}.
@item Build the target

Compile the code using
@code{ make -f Make_<arch> <target> > & make.log }
Do not use the @file{Make_template} file by itself to build the code.
@end enumerate

@section Making the Libraries
@cindex making the libraries
The libraries should be built automatically when you make
the application target.  However, it is a good idea to verify that
the compilation of the libaries is compatible with the compilation
of the application.
There are two libraries needed for SU(3) operations:
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{complex.a}
contains routines for operations on complex
numbers. See @file{complex.h} for a summary.
@item @strong{su3.a} 
contains routines for operations on SU3 matrices,
3 element complex vectors, and Wilson vectors (12 element complex
vectors).  See @file{su3.h} for a summary.
@end itemize

Assembler code for some routines and some CPUs is provided.  In each
case a ".c" file of the same name contains a C routine which should
work identically.  

@itemize
@item   .m4  --   Intel/Paragon
@item   .rs6k --  IBM/RS6000
@item   .t3e  --  SGI/Cray T3E
@item   .alpha --  DEC/alpha
@end itemize

The scalar workstation code is written in ANSI standard C.  If your
compiler is not ANSI compliant, try using the gnu C compiler gcc
instead.  Note that if the library code is compiled with gcc the
application directory code must also be compiled with gcc, and vice
versa.  This is because gcc understands prototypes and some other C
compilers don't, and they therefore pass float arguments differently.
We recommend gcc.  The code can also be compiled under C++, but it uses
no exclusively C++ constructs.

All library routines are single processor (no communications here) so
choose the appropriate make file according to the target processor.

Here are the steps for making the libraries:

Choose a make file as follows:

@itemize
@item        SGI/Cray T3E   --   Make_t3e
@item        IBM RS6000     --   Make_RS6K
@item        DEC alpha      --   Make_alpha
@item        P3 P4 SSE NASM --   Make_SSE_nasm
@item        any processor  --   Make_vanilla (no assembly language coding)
@end itemize

Edit the make file to get the CFLAGS and CC right.  Check the
applications make file to be sure the chosen libraries make file is
specified.

@section Checking the Build
@cindex checking the build

 Sample input and output files are provided for most make targets.
   It is a good idea to run the compiled code with the sample input
   file and compare the results with the sample output.  Since comparing
   a long list of numbers is tedious, each application directory contains 
   a @file{Make_test} facility for testing the code and doing the comparison for you.  
   To run this utility for the target @kbd{su3_rmd} building with the
   make file @file{Make_vanilla} use the command

@code{ make -f Make_test "ARCH=vanilla" "PROJS=su3_rmd" test   }

   Omitting the @kbd{PROJS} definition tests all targets in the application.
   The test consists in most cases of generating 
   a file @kbd{out.test.su3_rmd} and comparing
   key sections of the file with the trusted output @kbd{out.sample.su3_rmd}. 
   The comparision checks line-by-line the absolute difference of numerical 
   values on a line for numeric values greater than 1 and the relative
   difference for values less than 1 and writes a message 
   if a field is found to differ by 
   more than a tolerance specified in the @file{Make_test} file.  This is a rather
   crude test, since fractional discrepancies in some cases are more
   appropriate than absolute discrepancies and the test does not associate
   real and imaginary parts of a complex value.  Differences may arise because
   of round-off or, in molecular dynamics updates, a round-off-initiated drift.
   They may also arise because a value is simply a large number with an
   acceptably small fractional discrepancy.

   If you are testing in parallel mode, edit the file
   @file{Make_test_template} to get the correct job-launching commands.

@node General description, Programming with MILC Code, Building the MILC Code, Top
@chapter General description
@cindex General description of the MILC Code

@cindex MILC Collaboration
@strong{The MILC Code} is a set of codes written in C developed by the MIMD
Lattice Computation (MILC) collaboration for doing simulations of four
dimensional SU(3) lattice gauge theory on MIMD parallel machines.
The MILC
Code is publicly available for research purposes. Publications of work
done using this code or derivatives of this code should acknowledge this
use. @ref{Usage conditions}.

@menu
* Directory Layout::
* Overview of applications::
* Optional Compilation Macros::
@end menu

@node Directory Layout, Overview of applications, General description, General description
@section Directory Layout
@cindex Directory Layout

The new reader peering into the parent directory sees a bewildering set
of files. The Makefiles are for producing code on various platforms (see
@pxref{Building the MILC Code} for a description). The directories fall
into six categories: ``applications,'' ``generic,'' ``include,''
``libraries,'' ``doc,'' and ``file_utilities.''

@cindex libraries
Each @strong{application}, or major project of a research program, will
have its own directory. Applications are subjects like
@strong{ks_dynamical} (simulations with conventional dynamical
Kogut-Susskind quarks), @strong{clover_invert} (clover Dirac operator
inversion and spectroscopy), etc. All applications share the
@strong{libraries} directory containing low-level routines, the
@strong{include} directory containing most of the header files, the
@strong{generic} directory containing high level routines that is more
or less independent of the physics, and a set of slightly more specific
@strong{generic_XXX} directories. Examples of @strong{generic} code are
the random number routines, the layout routines, routines to evaluate
the plaquette or Polyakov loop, etc.

Each application usually has several variants that appear as separate
targets in the make file.  For example, the ks_dynamical application can
be compiled for hybrid Monte Carlo updating (su3_hmc) or the R algorithm
(su3_rmd).  All application directories have separate sample input and
output files for each target, labelled with the name of the target: for
example "in.sample.su3_hmc", etc., and a corresponding output file
"out.sample.su3_rmd", "out.sample.su3_hmc", etc.)

All declarations for top-level (external to a code file) functions are
in a single header file called something like "app_includes.h".  See
ks_dynamical/ks_dyn_includes.h for an example.  This header is to be
used for all compilations in the "app" directory.

The MILC Code should unpack into at least the following directories.
(@pxref{Building the MILC Code})

@sp 1
@center @emph{SUPPORT ROUTINES}
@table @strong
@item libraries:
Low level routines and include files.
@itemize @bullet

@item complex.a

Library of routines for complex numbers.

@item su3.a

Library of routines for SU(3) operations.

@end itemize
@item include:
@itemize @bullet

@item config.h

Specification of processor configuration and operating system environment.

@item complex.h

Header file of definitions and macros for complex numbers.
@item su3.h

Header file of definitions and macros for SU(3) matrix and fermion
operations.

@item comdefs.h

Header files for communications


@item generic_XXX.h

Header files and declarations for routines in directory generic_XXX

@item dirs.h

Defines some standard macros for lattice directions.

@item macros.h

Definitions required in all applications: field offsets, field pointers,
looping over variables...

@item io_lat.h and io_wb.h

Header files for routines for reading and writing lattices (the routines
are in @kbd{generic})

@item int32type.h

Defines 32-bit integer type

@item loopend.h

Small optimization for loop control.

@item prefetch.h prefetch_asm.h

Header files defining subroutine or macro calls for cache preloading.

@item random.h

Definition of structure for random number state.

@end itemize
@item generic:
	This directory holds all the communications routines and
        a few useful routines for generating random numbers and computing
the plaquette and Polyakov loop.

@item generic_XXX:
	High level code which several applications directories might use.
This includes inverters and simple measurement routines, such as for
spectroscopy.
  The
	other directories, which are for real applications,  use
	the routines in these directories where possible, otherwise
	copy routines from these directories and modify them or write
	new routines. Presently ``XXX'' includes 
generic_clover, generic_form, generic_ks, generic_pg, and generic_wilson.

@end table
  A set of wrappers for calls to the inverters is provided in
@kbd{generic_wilson} and @kbd{generic_clover}. 
 Using them is optional, of course.
These wrappers make it possible to "plug" in the inverter at
compilation time by linking the appropriate wrapper and inverter.  The
wrappers come in a "lean" and a not-so-lean version.  Since the
inverters they call destroy the source, and restarting requires
restoring the source, the options are recreating the source (lean
version) or saving it (not-so-lean).  Both versions requires a
structure "@kbd{wilson_quark_source}" that holds the source parameters.
This structure is declared in the @kbd{lattice.h} file.  See
@kbd{wilson_invert/lattice.h} for an example.  This structure can be
customized.  The structure is loaded by the calling program and then
passed as an argument to the wrapper function.  The wrapper, in turn
passes it through to the function that creates the source, which you
select at compilation time.  The source is built by a routine in
@kbd{generic_wilson} or @kbd{generic_clover}. 
 All source routines have the same
function name, so the source is selected from the @kbd{Make_template} file
by linking from the appropriate object file.  For the not-so-lean
wrappers, the calling function builds the source.  The supplied source
routines require the "@kbd{wilson_quark_source" structure}. If you want to
create a new source, see @kbd{generic_wilson/w_source.c} and
@kbd{generic_wilson/w_source_h.c} for an example.

@node Overview of applications, Optional Compilation Macros , Directory Layout, General description
@section Overview of Applications
@cindex Overview of Applications in Release Version
@table @strong
@item ks_dynamical:
	Simulations with dynamical Kogut-Susskind fermions.  Make targets
	include the "R", "phi" and hybrid Monte Carlo updating
	algorithms.  Measurements of the plaquette, Polyakov loop,
@tex 
$<\psi\bar\psi>$ 
@end tex
        , and fermions energy and pressure are included.  Optional
	measurements include the hadron spectrum, screening spectrum,
	and some wave functions (FFT routines are included in wave
        function codes)


@item pure_gauge:
	Simulation of the pure gauge theory, using microcanonical overrelaxed
and quasi-heat bath, or hybrid Monte Carlo algorithms. Doesn't really
measure very much.

@item clover_invert:
	Inversion of clover fermion matrix (conjugate gradient, MR, and
        BiCG algorithms) and measurements with
	clover quarks.  Lattices are supposed to be generated by
	someone else. 

@item clover_dynamical:
	Dynamical clover QCD with a single degenerate quark mass.

@item hvy_qpot:
        Wilson loops for potentials

@item wilson_dynamical:
	Simulations with dynamical Wilson fermions.  Variants
	include the "R", "phi" and hybrid Monte Carlo updating
	algorithms.  Measurements of the plaquette, Polyakov loop,
@tex 
$<\psi\bar\psi>$ 
@end tex
        ,and fermion energy and pressure.  Optional
	measurements include hadron spectrum, screening spectrum,
	axial current quark mass, and Landau gauge quark propagators.

@item clover_dynamical:
	Simulations with dynamical clover fermions.  Variants
	include the "R", "phi" and hybrid Monte Carlo updating
	algorithms. 
@end table

@center @emph{ADDITIONAL APPLICATIONS IN DEVELOPMENT VERSION}
@table @strong
@item arb_dirac_eigen:
        Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of very general fermion actions with
        four Dirac spin indices.  Not tested for more than one node.
        @kbd{degrand@@physics.colorado.edu}.

@item arb_dirac_invert:
        Spectrum for very general fermion actions with four Dirac spin indices.
        Not tested for more than one node.
        @kbd{degrand@@physics.colorado.edu}.

@item clover_hybrids
	Hybrid spectroscopy with clover fermions.
        @kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu})

@item h_dibaryon:
	H-dibaryon spectrum for clover quarks.

@item heavy
	Wilson heavy-light spectroscopy with hopping parameter expansion.

@item hqet_heavy_to_light:
        HQET form factor code.  Not used in production, yet.

@item ks_eigen
        Eigenvalues for improved staggered fermion operators.
        @kbd{kostas@@physics.arizona.edu})

@item ks_hybrids2
        Hybrid staggered spectroscopy.
        @kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu})

@item ks_imp_dyn1
	Dynamical QCD with improved staggered quarks of 1 degenerate mass.
        @kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu})

@item ks_imp_dyn2
	Dynamical QCD with improved staggered quarks of 2 masses.
        @kbd{doug@@klingon.physics.arizona.edu})

@item propagating_form_factor
        Form factors with propagating quarks.
        @kbd{detar@@physics.utah.edu})

@item schroed_cl_inv
        Schroedinger functional code (quenched) with clover fermions.
        @kbd{heller@@scri.fsu.edu})

@item schroed_ks_dyn
        Schroedinger functional code (dynamical) with staggered fermions.
        @kbd{heller@@scri.fsu.edu})

@item schroed_pg
        Pure gauge schroedinger functional code.
        @kbd{heller@@scri.fsu.edu})

@item smooth_inst
        Does APE smoothing of gauge configurations and computes
        the topological charge density. 

@item string_break
        Staggered fermion string breaking.

@item symanzik_sl32
        Pure gauge Monte Carlo for an arbitrary hypercubic action.

@item wilson_static
        Static light spectroscopy for Wilson fermions.

@end table


The top level directory contains a @file{README} file with specific information
on how to @kbd{make} an application code (@pxref{Building the MILC Code}).

@node Optional Compilation Macros, , Overview of applications, General description
@cindex Macros, Optional
@cindex Compilation Macros

We list some macros affecting compilation of various sections of the
code that may be defined by user option.  Unless otherwise stated, they
are defined in the application @file{Make_template} file in the line
@kbd{DEFINES =}.  Thus, for example, in routines that call a conjugate
gradient inverter, the line @kbd{DEFINES = -DCGTIME} causes timing
information to be printed to standard output.  Also check the
application Make_template files for information about compilation
options.

The table shows what is turned on if the macro is defined.

@table @strong
@item SITERAND
      Usually defined in the application file @file{defines.h}.  
Keep a separate random number generate for each site.  Makes the
code results deterministic irrespective of node number and layout.

@item LU
      Use LU decomposition in @file{generic_clover/d_congrad2_cl.c} and @file{generic_wilson/d_congrad2.c}

@item CONGRAD_TMP_VECTORS
      For improved staggered fermion inverters.  Puts the temporary
conjugate gradient vectors in a field-major array, rather than inside
the site structure.  May give better performance.

@item DSLASH_TMP_LINKS
      For improved staggered dslash.  Puts longlinks and fatlinks in a
field-major array, rather than inside the site structure.  May give
better performance.

@item INLINE
      Usually defined in the architecture make file.  Calls for inline
versions of some code.

@item FAST
      Defined in the library make files.  Calls for unrolled versions of
various library routines.

@item NPBP_REPS
      For use with staggered fermion calcuation of stochastic
estimations of psi-bar-psi.  Sets the number of stochastic sources per
configuration.  If undefined, defaults to one.

@item CGTIME
      Print timing information for the various inverters.

@item MRTIME
      Print timing information for the @kbd{generic_wilson/mrilu_w_or.c} inverter.

@item GFTIME
      For use with the improved staggered fermion code and the Symanzik
pure gauge code.  Print timing information for the computation of the
gauge field force from @kbd{generic_ks/gauge_stuff.c}.

@item DSLASHTIME
      Print timing of staggered fermion dslash calls.

@item DSLASHTIMES
      Print more detailed timing of staggered fermion dslash operation.

@item FFTIME
      For use with the improved staggered fermion code. Print timing
information in @kbd{generic_ks/quark_stuff.c} for the calculation of the
fermion force.

@item LLTIME
      For use with the improved staggered fermion code. Print timing
information in @kbd{generic_ks/quark_stuff.c} for the calculation of
long links and fat links.

@item M4TIME
      For use with the conventional staggered fermion inverters.  Prints
performance information about SU(3) matrix multiplication in dslash.

@item IOTIME
      In some applications, reports file I/O timing. 

@item PRTIME
      In some applications, reports time for hadron propagator
calcuations.

@item NOPREFETCH
      Suppresses prefetching.  Used to study optmization strategies.

@item P3 and P4
      Use only for Intel P3 and P4 processors. Turns on gcc asm 
      prefetching macros.

@item SSE
      Use only for processors supporting the SSE instructions and the
      gcc compiler.  Intel P3 and P4 processors and Athlon Thunderbird.  In
      conjunction with SSE_INLINE, inserts inline SSE assembly code
      for selected SU(3) linear algebra library calls.  For details
      see @kbd{sse/README_SSE}.

@item SSE_INLINE
      See SSE above.
      
@end table

@node Programming with MILC Code, Writing Your Own Application, General description, Top
@chapter Programming with MILC Code
@cindex Programming with MILC Code


These notes document some of the features of the MILC QCD code.  They
are intended to help people understand the basic philosophy and
structure of the code, and to outline how one would modify existing
applications for a new project.

@menu
* Header files::
* Global variables::
* Lattice storage::
* Data types::
* Library routines::
* Moving around in the lattice::
* Accessing fields at other sites::
* Details of gathers and creating new ones::
* Distributing sites among nodes::
* Reading and Writing Lattices::
* Random numbers::
* A Sample Applications Directory::
* Bugs and features::
@end menu

@node Header files, Global variables, Programming with MILC Code, Programming with MILC Code
@section  Header files
@cindex header files

Various header files define structures, macros, and global
variables.  The minimal set at the moment is:
@cindex config.h
@cindex complex.h
@cindex su3.h
@cindex macros.h
@cindex comdefs.h
@cindex defines.h
@cindex lattice.h
@cindex params.h

@table @file
@item config.h
specifies processor and operating-system-dependent macros

@item complex.h	
code for complex numbers (@pxref{Library routines}).

@item su3.h 
routines for SU(3) operations, eg. matrix multiply (@pxref{Library
routines}).

@item comdefs.h 
macros and defines for communication routines (@pxref{Library routines}).

@item   defines.h
defines local macros.  SITERAND should be defined here.  Other macros
that are independent of the site structure can also be defined here.
Compiler macros common to all targets are also defined here.


@item params.h
defines the parameter structure for holding parameter values read from
standard input, such as the lattice size, number of iterations, etc.

@item   lattice.h
defines lattice fields and global variables, found in applications directories
@end table

This last file is rather special.  It defines the site structure
(fields) for the lattice. While other header files are stored in the
@strong{include} directory and not changed, a @file{lattice.h} is stored
in the application directory, since it is modified to contain the fields
pecific to a particular application.

@vindex Include files. The local header defines.h must be included near the
top of the lattice.h file.  Other headers, of course, should be included
to declare data types appearing in the lattice.h file.

@vindex EXTERN
@vindex CONTROL
Global variables are defined using a macro @kbd{EXTERN} which is usually
just "extern", but when @kbd{CONTROL} is defined, is null. The effect is
to reserve storage in whichever file @kbd{CONTROL} is defined, so that
exactly one file, typically the @emph{main()} program, which is
typically part of a file with a name like @kbd{control.c}, should
contain a @kbd{#define CONTROL} before all the other includes (C++ would
fix this nonsense).


@node Global variables, Lattice storage, Header files, Programming with MILC Code
@section  Global variables
@cindex Global variables

@vindex this_node
@vindex number_of_nodes
@vindex sites_on_node
@vindex even_sites_on_node
@vindex odd_sites_on_node
@vindex nx,ny,nz,nt
@vindex volume
@vindex epsilon
@vindex nflavors
@vindex iseed
@vindex warms
@vindex trajecs
@vindex steps
@vindex stepsQ
@vindex saveflag
@vindex beta
@vindex mass
@vindex epsilon 
@vindex fixflag
@vindex *startfile
@vindex *savefile 
@vindex startflag
@vindex saveflag 
@vindex total_iters 
There are a number of global variables available.  Most of these are
declared in @file{lattice.h}. Unless specified, these variables are
initialized in the function @kbd{initial_set()}.  Most of them take
values from a parameter input file at run time.

@table @kbd
@item int nx,ny,nz,nt
lattice dimensions
@item int volume
volume = nx * ny * nz * nt
@item int iseed
random number seed
@end table

Other variables are used to keep track of the relation between sites of the
lattice and nodes:
@table @kbd
@item int this_node
number of this node
@item int number_of_nodes
number of nodes in use
@item int sites_on_node	
number of sites on this node. [@emph{This variable is set in:}
@kbd{setup_layout()}]
@item int even_sites_on_node
number of evensites on this node. [@emph{This variable is set in:}
@kbd{setup_layout()}]
@item int odd_sites_on_node
number of odd sites on this node. [@emph{This variable is set in:}
@kbd{setup_layout()}]
@end table


@cindex @file{setup.c}
@vindex params
There are other variables which are not fundamental to the layout of the
lattice but vary from application to application. These dynamical
variables are part of a @kbd{params} struct, defined in the required
header @cindex params.h, which is passed between nodes by
@kbd{initial_set()} in @file{setup.c} For example, a pure gauge
simulation might have a @kbd{params} struct like this:
@example
/* structure for passing simulation parameters to each node */
typedef struct @{
        int nx,ny,nz,nt;  /* lattice dimensions */
        int iseed;      /* for random numbers */
        int warms;      /* the number of warmup trajectories */
        int trajecs;    /* the number of real trajectories */
        int steps;      /* number of steps for updating */
        int stepsQ;     /* number of steps for quasi-heatbath */
        int propinterval;  /* number of trajectories between measurements */
        int startflag;  /* what to do for beginning lattice */
        int fixflag;    /* whether to gauge fix */
        int saveflag;   /* what to do with lattice at end */
        float beta;     /* gauge coupling */
        float epsilon;  /* time step */
        char startfile[80],savefile[80];
@} params; 
@end example
These run-time variables are usually loaded by a loop over
@kbd{readin()} defined in @file{setup.c}.


@node Lattice storage, Data types, Global variables, Programming with MILC Code
@section Lattice storage 
@cindex Lattice storage
@cindex site
@vindex site
@cindex lattice[]

 All the variables of your project which
live on one site of the lattice (gauge fields, quarks, plus auxilliaries)
 are found in structures of type @kbd{site}.  This
structure is defined in @file{lattice.h} (@pxref{Header files}). Each
@emph{node} of the parallel machine has an array of such structures
called @kbd{lattice}, with as many elements as there are sites on the
@emph{node}. 
 In scalar mode there is only one @emph{node}.  The
@kbd{site} structure looks like this:
@example
typedef struct @{
    /* The first part is standard to all programs */
        /* coordinates of this site */
        short x,y,z,t;
        /* is it even or odd? */
        char parity;
        /* my index in the lattice array */
        int index;

    /* Now come the physical fields, application dependent. We will 
       add or delete whatever we need. This is just an example. */
        /* gauge field */
        su3_matrix link[4];

        /* antihermitian momentum matrices in each direction */
         anti_hermitmat mom[4];

         su3_vector phi; /* Gaussian random source vector */ 
@} site; 
@end example

At run time space for the lattice sites is allocated dynamically,
typically as an array @kbd{lattice[i]}, each element of which is a site
structure.  Thus, to refer to the @kbd{phi} field on a particular
lattice site, site "@kbd{i}" on this node, you say
@example
   lattice[i].phi,
@end example
and for the real part of color 0
@example
   lattice[i].phi.c[0].real,
@end example
etc. You usually won't need to know the relation between the index
@kbd{i} and a the location of a particular site (but see
 (@pxref{Distributing sites among nodes} for how to figure out
the index @kbd{i}). 

In general, looping over sites is done using a pointer to the
 site, and then you would
refer to the field as:
@example
site *s; ...  
/* s gets set to &(lattice[i]) */ 
s->phi
@end example

The coordinate, parity and index fields are used by the gather routines
and other utility routines, so it is probably a bad idea to mess with
them unless you want to change a lot of things.  Other things can be
added or deleted with abandon.

The routine @kbd{generic/make_lattice()} is called from @kbd{setup()} to
allocate the lattice on each node.

@cindex neighbor[]
In addition to the fields in the @kbd{site} structure, there are two
sets of vectors whose elements correspond to lattice sites. 
They are hidden in the communications routines and you are likely never to
encounter them. These are
the eight vectors of integers:
@example
int *neighbor[MAX_GATHERS]
@end example
@kbd{neighbor[XDOWN][i]} is the index of the site in the @strong{XDOWN}
direction from the i'th site on the
node, if that site is on the same node. If the neighboring site is on
another node, this pointer will be @strong{NOT_HERE (= -1)}. These
vectors are mostly used by the gather routines.

@cindex gen_pt[]
There are a number of important vectors of pointers used for accessing
fields at other (usually neighboring) neighboring sites,
@example
char **gen_pt[MAX_GATHERS]
@end example
These vectors of pointers are declared in @file{lattice.h} and allocated
in @kbd{generic/make_lattice()}. They are filled by the gather routines,
@kbd{start_gather()} and @kbd{start_general_gather()}, with pointers to
the gathered field. @xref{Accessing fields at other sites}.  You use one
of these pointer vectors for each simultaneous gather you have going.


This storage scheme seems to allow the easiest coding, and likely the
fastest performance.  It certainly makes gathers about as easy as
possible.  However, it is somewhat wasteful of memory, since all fields
are statically allocated.  (You can use unions if two fields are needed
in mutually exclusive parts of the program.)  Also, there is no
mechanism for defining a field on only even or odd sites.

The "@emph{site major}" ordering of variables in memory probably means
that useful variables will fairly often be in cache.  The contrasting
"@emph{field major}" ordering ( @kbd{su3_matrix}
@kbd{xlink[volume]}, @kbd{ylink[volume]}...) is more suitable for
vectorizing in the traditional sense.

@node Data types, Library routines, Lattice storage, Programming with MILC Code
@section Data types
@cindex Data types

Various data structures have been defined for QCD computations, which
we now list.   You may define new ones if you wish.
In names of members of structure, we  use the following conventions:
@table @kbd
@item c 
means color, and has an index which takes three values (0,1,2).
@item d
means Dirac spin, and its index takes four values (0-3).
@item e
means element of a matrix, and has two indices which take three values -
row and column--(0-2),(0-2)
@end table

Complex numbers: (in @file{complex.h})
@example
typedef struct @{ /* standard complex number declaration for single- */
   float real;    /* precision complex numbers */
   float imag; 
@} complex;

typedef struct @{ /* standard complex number declaration for double- */
   double real;   /* precision complex numbers */
   double imag; 
@} double_complex;
@end example

Three component complex vectors, 3x3 complex matrices, and 3x3
antihermitian matrices stored in triangular (compressed) format.  (in
@file{su3.h})
@example
typedef struct @{ complex e[3][3]; @} su3_matrix; 
typedef struct @{ complex c[3]; @} su3_vector; 
typedef struct @{
  float m00im,m11im,m22im;
  complex m01,m02,m12; 
@} anti_hermitmat;
@end example

Wilson vectors have both Dirac and color indices:
@example
  typedef struct @{ su3_vector d[4]; @} wilson_vector;
@end example
Projections of Wilson vectors
@tex
$(1 \pm \gamma_\mu)\psi$
@end tex
@example
  typedef struct @{ su3_vector h[2]; @} half_wilson_vector;
@end example
A definition to be used in the next definition:
@example
  typedef struct @{ wilson_vector d[4]; @} spin_wilson_vector;
@end example
A four index object --- source spin and color by sink spin and color:
@example
  typedef struct @{ spin_wilson_vector c[3]; @} wilson_propagator
@end example

Examples:
@example
su3_vector phi; /* declares a vector */ 
su3_matrix m1,m2,m3;         /* declares 3x3 complex matrices */ 
wilson_vector wvec;          /* declares a Wilson quark vector */

phi.c[0].real = 1.0;         /* sets real part of color 0 to 1.0 */ 
phi.c[1] = cmplx(0.0,0.0);   /* sets color 1 to zero (requires
                                including "complex.h" */ 
m1.e[0][0] = cmplx(0,0);     /* refers to 0,0 element */ 
mult_su3_nn( &m1, &m2, &m3); /* subroutine arguments are usually
                                addresses of structures */
wvec.d[2].c[0].imag = 1.0;   /* How to refer to imaginary part of
                                spin two, color zero. */
@end example

@node Library routines, Moving around in the lattice, Data types, Programming with MILC Code
@section Library routines
@cindex Library routines

@subsection Complex numbers
@file{complex.h} and @file{complex.a} contain macros and subroutines for
complex numbers.  For example:
@example
complex a,b,c; 
CMUL(a,b,c); /* macro: c <- a*b */
@end example
Note that all the subroutines (@kbd{cmul()}, etc.) take addresses as
arguments, but the macros generally take the structures themselves.
These functions have separate versions for single and double precision
complex numbers.  The macros work with either single or double precison
(or mixed).  @file{complex.a} contains:
@example
complex cmplx(float r, float i);      /* (r,i) */ 
complex cadd(complex *a, complex *b); /* a + b */ 
complex cmul(complex *a, complex *b); /* a * b */ 
complex csub(complex *a, complex *b); /* a - b */ 
complex cdiv(complex *a, complex *b); /* a / b */ 
complex conjg(complex *a);            /* conjugate of a */ 
complex cexp(complex *a);             /* exp(a) */ 
complex clog(complex *a);             /* ln(a) */ 
complex csqrt(complex *a);            /* sqrt(a) */
complex ce_itheta(float theta);       /* exp( i*theta) */

double_complex dcmplx(double r, double i);                  /* (r,i) */ 
double_complex dcadd(double_complex *a, double_complex *b); /* a + b */ 
double_complex dcmul(double_complex *a, double_complex *b); /* a * b */ 
double_complex dcsub(double_complex *a, double_complex *b); /* a - b */ 
double_complex dcdiv(double_complex *a, double_complex *b); /* a / b */ 
double_complex dconjg(double_complex *a);          /* conjugate of a */ 
double_complex dcexp(double_complex *a);                   /* exp(a) */ 
double_complex dclog(double_complex *a);                    /* ln(a) */ 
double_complex dcsqrt(double_complex *a);                 /* sqrt(a) */ 
double_complex dce_itheta(double theta);            /* exp( i*theta) */
@end example
and macros:
@example
CONJG(a,b)        b = conjg(a)
CADD(a,b,c)       c = a + b
CSUM(a,b)         a += b
CSUB(a,b,c)       c = a - b
CMUL(a,b,c)       c = a * b
CDIV(a,b,c)       c = a / b
CMUL_J(a,b,c)     c = a * conjg(b)
CMULJ_(a,b,c)     c = conjg(a) * b
CMULJJ(a,b,c)     c = conjg(a*b)
CNEGATE(a,b)      b = -a
CMUL_I(a,b)       b = ia
CMUL_MINUS_I(a,b) b = -ia
CMULREAL(a,b,c)   c = ba with b real and a complex
CDIVREAL(a,b,c)   c = a/b with a complex and b real
@end example

@subsection SU(3) operations
@file{su3.h} and @file{su3.a} contain a plethora of
functions for SU(3) operations.
For example:
@example
void mult_su3_nn(su3_matrix *a, su3_matrix *b, su3_matrix *c); 
/* matrix multiply, no adjoints
   *c <- *a * *b (arguments are pointers) */

void mult_su3_mat_vec_sum(su3_matrix *a, su3_vector *b, su3_vector *c);
/* su3_matrix times su3_vector multiply and add to another su3_vector
   *c <- *A * *b + *c */
@end example
There have come to be a great many of these routines, too many to keep a
duplicate list of here.  Consult the include file @file{su3.h} for a
list of prototypes and description of functions. An html version of
@file{su3.h} is available at <a
href="http://www.cliodhna.cop.uop.edu/~hetrick/milc/su3.html">su3.html</a>.


@node Moving around in the lattice, Accessing fields at other sites, Library routines, Programming with MILC Code
@section Moving around in the lattice
@cindex Moving around in the lattice

@vindex field_offset
@vindex field_pointer
@vindex F_OFFSET
@vindex F_PT
Various definitions, macros and routines exist for dealing with the
lattice fields.  
The definitions and macros (defined in @file{dirs.h}) are:
@example
/* Directions, and a macro to give the opposite direction */ 
/* These must go from 0 to 7 because they will be used to index an
   array. */ 
/* Also define NDIRS = number of directions */
#define XUP 0 
#define YUP 1 
#define ZUP 2 
#define TUP 3 
#define TDOWN 4 
#define ZDOWN 5 
#define YDOWN 6 
#define XDOWN 7 
#define OPP_DIR(dir) (7-(dir))  /* Opposite direction */ 
                                /* for example, OPP_DIR(XUP) is XDOWN */
/* number of directions */ 
#define NDIRS 8 
@end example

The parity of a site is @strong{EVEN} or @strong{ODD}, where
@strong{EVEN} means (x+y+z+t)%2=0.  Lots of routines take @strong{EVEN},
@strong{ODD} or @strong{EVENANDODD} as an argument. Specifically (in hex):
@example
#define EVEN 0x02 
#define ODD 0x01 
#define EVENANDODD 0x03
@end example

Often we want to use the name of a field as an argument to a routine, as
in @kbd{dslash(chi,phi)}. Often these fields are elements of the structure 
@kbd{site}, and such variables can't be used directly as arguments
 in C. Instead, we use a
 macro to convert the name of a field
into an integer, and another one to convert this integer back into an
address at a given site.  A type @kbd{field_offset}, which is secretly
an integer, is defined to help make the programs clearer.

@strong{F_OFFSET}(@kbd{fieldname}) gives the offset in the site structure of
the named field. @strong{F_PT}(@kbd{*site}, @kbd{field_offset}) gives the
address of the field whose offset is @kbd{field_offset} at the site
@kbd{*site}. An example is certainly in order:
@example
main() @{
  copyfield( F_OFFSET(phi), F_OFFSET(chi) );
  /* "phi" and "chi" are names of su3_vector's in site. */ 
@}

/* Copy an su3_vector field over the whole lattice */
copyfield(field_offset off1, field_offset off2) @{
  register int i;
  register site *s;
  register su3_vector *v1,*v2;

  for(i=0;i<nsites_on_node;i++) @{ /* loop over sites on node */
     s = &(lattice[i]); /* pointer to current site */
     v1 = (su3_vector *)F_PT( s, off1); /* address of first vector */
     v2 = (su3_vector *)F_PT( s, off2);
     *v2 = *v1; /* copy the vector at this site */
  @} 
@}
@end example


For ANSI prototyping, you must
 typecast the result of the
@strong{F_PT} macro to the appropriate pointer type.  (It naturally
produces a character pointer).  The code for copyfield could be much
shorter at the expense of clarity.  Here we use a macro to be defined
below.
@example
void copyfield(field_offset off1, field_offset off2) @{
  register int i;
  register site *s;
  FORALLSITES(i,s) @{
    *(su3_vector *)F_PT(s,off1) = *(su3_vector *)F_PT(s,off2);
  @} 
@}
@end example

The following macros are not necessary, but are very useful.  You may
use them or ignore them as you see fit. Loops over sites are so common
that we have defined macros for them ( in
@file{include/macros.h}). These macros use an integer and a site pointer,
which are available inside the loop.  The site pointer is especially
useful for accessing fields at the site.
@example
/* macros to loop over sites of a given parity, or all sites on a node.
   Usage:
        int i;
        site *s;
        FOREVENSITES(i,s) @{
            Commands go here, where s is a pointer to the current
            site and i is the index of the site on the node.
            For example, the phi vector at this site is "s->phi".
        @} */ 
#define FOREVENSITES(i,s) \
    for(i=0,s=lattice;i<even_sites_on_node;i++,s++)
#define FORODDSITES(i,s) \
    for(i=even_sites_on_node,s= &(lattice[i]);i<sites_on_node;i++,s++)
#define FORALLSITES(i,s) \
    for(i=0,s=lattice;i<sites_on_node;i++,s++)
#define FORSOMEPARITY(i,s,parity) \
    for( i=((choice)==ODD ? even_sites_on_node : 0 ),  \
    s= &(lattice[i]); \
    i< ( (choice)==EVEN ? even_sites_on_node : sites_on_node); \
    i++,s++)
@end example
The first three of these macros loop over even, odd or all sites on the
node, setting a pointer to the site and the index in the array.  The
index and pointer are available for use by the commands inside the
braces.  The last macro takes an additional argument which should be one
of @strong{EVEN}, @strong{ODD} or @strong{EVENANDODD}, and loops over
sites of the selected parity.

@node Accessing fields at other sites, Details of gathers and creating new ones, Moving around in the lattice, Programming with MILC Code
@section Accessing fields at other sites
@cindex Accessing fields at other sites


At present, each node only reads and writes fields on its own sites.  To read
fields at other sites, we use gather routines.  These are portable in
the sense that they will look the same on all the machines on which this
code runs, although what is inside them is quite
different.  All of these routines return pointers to fields.  If the
fields are on the same node, these are just pointers into the lattice,
and if the fields are on sites on another node some message passing
takes place.  Because the communcation routines may have to allocate
buffers for data, it is necessary to free the buffers by calling the
appropriate cleanup routine when you are finished with the data.  These
routines are in @file{com_XXXXX.c}, where @kbd{XXXXX} identifies the
machine.

The three routines are @kbd{start_gather}, which starts the data
exchange, @kbd{wait_gather}, which interrupts the processor until the
data arrives, and @kbd{cleanup_gather}, which frees the memory used by
the gathered data.  A special @kbd{msg_tag} structure is used to
identify the gather.  If you are doing more than one gather at a time,
just use different @kbd{*msg_tags} for each one to keep them straight.

The abstraction used in gathers is that sites fetch data from sites,
rather than nodes from nodes.  In this way the physical distribution of
data among the nodes is hidden from the higher level call.  Any
one-to-one mapping of sites onto sites can be used to define a gather
operation, but the most common gather fetches data from a neigboring
site in one of the eight cardinal directions.  The result of a gather is
presented as a list of pointers.  Generally one of the @kbd{gen_pt[0]},
etc. arrays is used. (@pxref{Lattice storage}). On each site, or on each
site of the selected parity, this pointer either points to an on-node
address when the required data is on-node or points to an address in a
communications buffer when the required data has been passed from
another node.

These routines use asynchronous sends and receives when possible, so it
is possible to start one or more gathers going, and do something else
while awaiting the data.

Here are the three gather routines:

@example
/* "start_gather()" starts asynchronous sends and receives required
    to gather neighbors. */

msg_tag * start_gather(field,size,direction,parity,dest);
  /* arguments */
  field_offset field;  /* which field? Some member of structure "site" */
  int size;            /* size in bytes of the field
                            (eg. sizeof(su3_vector))*/
  int direction;       /* direction to gather from. eg XUP */
  int parity;          /* parity of sites whose neighbors we gather.
                            one of EVEN, ODD or EVENANDODD. */ 
  char * dest;         /* one of the vectors of pointers */


/* "wait_gather()" waits for receives to finish, insuring that the
   data has actually arrived.  The argument is the (msg_tag *) returned
   by start_gather. */

void wait_gather(msg_tag *mbuf);


/* "cleanup_gather()" frees all the buffers that were allocated, WHICH
    MEANS THAT THE GATHERED DATA MAY SOON DISAPPEAR. */

void cleanup_gather(msg_tag *mbuf);
@end example

Nearest neighbor gathers are done as follows. In the first example
we gather @kbd{phi} at all even sites from the neighbors in the
@strong{XUP} direction.  (@emph{Gathering at @strong{EVEN} sites means
that @kbd{phi} at odd sites will be made available for computations at
@strong{EVEN} sites.})
@example
msg_tag *tag; 
site *s; 
int i;

tag = start_gather( F_OFFSET(phi), sizeof(su3_vector), XUP,
                    EVEN, gen_pt[0] );

/* do other stuff */

wait_gather(tag); 
/* *(su3_vector *)gen_pt[0][i] now contains the address of the
    phi vector (or a copy therof) on the neighbor of site i in the
    XUP direction for all even sites i.  */

FOREVENSITES(i,s) @{ 
/* do whatever you want with it here.
   (su3_vector *)(gen_pt[0][i]) is a pointer to phi on
   the neighbor site. */ 
@}

cleanup_gather(tag); 
/* subsequent calls will overwrite the gathered fields. but if you 
don't clean up, you will eventually run out of space */
@end example


This second example gathers @kbd{phi} from two directions at once:
@example
msg_tag *tag0,*tag1; 
tag0 = start_gather( F_OFFSET(phi), sizeof(su3_vector), XUP,
                     EVENANDODD, gen_pt[0] ); 
tag1 = start_gather( F_OFFSET(phi), sizeof(su3_vector), YUP,
                     EVENANDODD, gen_pt[1] );

/** do other stuff **/

wait_gather(tag0); 
/* you may now use *(su3_vector *)gen_pt[0][i], the
   neighbors in the XUP direction. */

wait_gather(tag1); 
/* you may now use *(su3_vector *)gen_pt[1][i], the
   neighbors in the YUP direction. */

cleanup_gather(tag0); 
cleanup_gather(tag1);
@end example

Of course, you can also simultaneously gather different fields, or
gather one field to even sites and another field to odd sites.  Just be
sure to keep your @kbd{msg_tag} pointers straight.  The internal
workings of these routines are far too horrible to discuss here.
Consult the source code and comments in @file{com_XXXXX.c} if you must.

Another predefined gather fetches a field at an arbitrary displacement
from a site.  It uses the family of calls @kbd{start_general_gather},
@kbd{wait_general_gather}, @kbd{cleanup_general_gather}.  It works like
the gather described above except that instead of specifying the
direction you specify a four-component array of integers which is the
relative displacement of the field to be fetched.  It is a bit slower
than a gather defined by @kbd{make_gather}, because it is necessary to
build the neighbor tables with each call to @kbd{start_general_gather}.

Also, there can only be one @kbd{general_gather} at a time working.
Thus if you need to do two @kbd{general_gathers} you must
wait for the first gather before starting the second. (It is not
necessary to cleanup the first gather before starting the second.)

Chaos will ensue if you use @kbd{wait_gather()} with a message tag
returned by @kbd{start_general_gather()}, or vice-versa.
@kbd{start_general_gather()} has the following format:
@example
/* "start_general_gather()" starts asynchronous sends and receives
    required to gather neighbors. */ 
msg_tag * start_general_gather(field,size,displacement,parity,dest)
  /* arguments */
  field_offset field; /* which field? Some member of structure site */
  int size;           /* size in bytes of the field 
                           (eg. sizeof(su3_vector))*/
  int *displacement;  /* displacement to gather from,
                           a four component array */
  int parity;         /* parity of sites whose neighbors we gather.
                           one of EVEN, ODD or EVENANDODD. */
  char ** dest;       /* one of the vectors of pointers */

/* "wait_general_gather()" waits for receives to finish, insuring that
    the data has actually arrived.  The argument is the (msg_tag *) 
    returned by start_general_gather. */ 
void wait_general_gather(msg_tag *mbuf);

/* "cleanup_general_gather()" frees all the buffers that were
    allocated, @emph{WHICH MEANS THAT THE GATHERED DATA MAY SOON
    DISAPPEAR.}  */ 
void cleanup_general_gather(msg_tag *mbuf);
@end example

This example gathers @kbd{phi} from a site displaced by +1 in the x
direction and -1 in the y direction.
@example
msg_tag *tag; 
site *s; 
int i, disp[4];

disp[XUP] = +1; disp[YUP] = -1; disp[ZUP] = disp[TUP] = 0;

tag = start_general_gather( F_OFFSET(phi), sizeof(su3_vector), disp,
                            EVEN, gen_pt[0] ); /* do other stuff */

wait_general_gather(tag); 
/* gen_pt[0][i] now contains the address of the phi
   vector (or a copy therof) on the site displaced from site i
   by the vector "disp" for all even sites i. */

FOREVENSITES(i,s) @{ 
/* do whatever you want with it here.
   (su3_vector *)(gen_pt[0][i]) is a pointer to phi on
   the other site. */ 
@}

cleanup_general_gather(tag);
@end example

Version 6 supports gathers from fields, which are not a part of the
site structure.  Sample usage is:
@example
  su3_vector *tempvec;
  msg_tag *tag;
  tempvec = (su3_vector *)malloc( sites_on_node*sizeof(su3_vector) );
  ...
  FORALLSITES(i,s)@{  tempvec[i] = s->grand; @}
  ...
  tag=start_gather_from_temp( tempvec, sizeof(su3_vector), dir,EVEN,gen_pt[1] );
  ...
  wait_gather(tag);
  ...
  cleanup_gather(tag);
  ...
  free(tempvec);
@end example

  Don't use the site pointers to refer to elements of temporaries.
  You can't gather a part of a temporary field.  For example, the
    gauge links are typically defined as an array of 4 @kbd{su3_matrices},
    and we typically gather only one of them.  This won't work with
    temporaries.

  Don't try to implement successive gathers by using
 @kbd{start_gather_from_temp}
     to gather the @kbd{gen_pt fields}.  It will gather the pointers, but not
     what they point to.  This is insidious, because it will work on one
     node as you are testing it, but fail on multiple nodes.

To set up the data structures required by the gather routines,
@kbd{make_nn_gathers()} is called in the setup part of the program.
This must be done @emph{after} the call to @kbd{make_lattice()}.

@node Details of gathers and creating new ones, Distributing sites among nodes, Accessing fields at other sites, Programming with MILC Code
@section Details of gathers and creating new ones
@cindex Details of gathers and creating new ones

(You don't need to read this section the first time through.)

The nearest-neighbor and fixed-displacement gathers are always available
at run time, but a user can make other gathers using the
@kbd{make_gather} routine.  Examples of such gathers are the bit-reverse
and butterfly maps used in FFT's.  The only requirement is that the
gather pattern must correspond to a one-to-one map of sites onto sites.
@kbd{make_gather} speeds up gathers by preparing tables on each node
containing information about what sites must be sent to other nodes or
received from other nodes. The call to this routine is:
@example
#include <comdefs.h> 
int make_gather( function, arg_pointer, inverse, want_even_odd,
                 parity_conserve )
  int (*function)();
  int *arg_pointer;
  int inverse;
  int parity_conserve;
@end example

The @kbd{"function"} argument is a pointer to a function which defines
the mapping. This function must have the following form:
@example
int function( x, y, z, t, arg_pointer, forw_back, xpt, ypt, zpt, tpt)
  int x,y,z,t;
  int *arg_pointer;
  int forw_back;
  int *xpt,*ypt,*zpt,*tpt;
@end example
Here @kbd{x,y,z,t} are the coordinates of the site @emph{RECEIVING} the
data.  @kbd{arg_pointer} is a pointer to a list of integers, which is
passed through to the function from the call to @kbd{make_gather()}.
This provides a mechanism to use the same function for different
gathers.  For example, in setting up nearest neighbor gathers we would
want to specify the direction.  See the examples below.

@kbd{forw_back} is either @strong{FORWARDS} or @strong{BACKWARDS}.  If
it is @strong{FORWARDS}, the function should compute the coordinates of
the site that sends data to @kbd{x,y,z,t}.  If it is @strong{BACKWARDS},
the function should compute the coordinates of the site which gets data
from @kbd{x,y,z,t}.  It is necessary for the function to handle
@strong{BACKWARDS} correctly even if you don't want to set up the
inverse gather (see below).  At the moment, only one-to-one (invertible)
mappings are supported.

@cindex FFT
@cindex Butterflies (FFT)
The @kbd{inverse} argument to @kbd{make_gather()} is one of
@strong{OWN_INVERSE}, @strong{WANT_INVERSE}, or @strong{NO_INVERSE}.  If
it is @strong{OWN_INVERSE}, the mapping is its own inverse.  In other
words, if site @kbd{x1,y1,z1,t1} gets data from @kbd{x2,y2,z2,t2} then
site @kbd{x2,y2,z2,t2} gets data from @kbd{x1,y1,z1,t1}.  Examples of
mappings which are there own inverse are the butterflies in FFT's.  If
@kbd{inverse} is @strong{WANT_INVERSE}, then @kbd{make_gather()} will
make two sets of lists, one for the gather and one for the gather using
the inverse mapping.  If @kbd{inverse} is @strong{NO_INVERSE}, then
only one set of tables is made.

The @kbd{want_even_odd} argument is one of @strong{ALLOW_EVEN_ODD} or
@strong{NO_EVEN_ODD}.  If it is @strong{ALLOW_EVEN_ODD} separate tables
are made for even and odd sites, so that start gather can be called with
parity @strong{EVEN}, @strong{ODD} or @strong{EVENANDODD}.  If it is
@strong{NO_EVEN_ODD}, only one set of tables is made and you can only
call gathers with parity @strong{EVENANDODD}.

The @kbd{parity_conserve} argument to @kbd{make_gather()} is one of
@strong{SAME_PARITY}, @strong{SWITCH_PARITY}, or @strong{SCRAMBLE_PARITY}.
Use @strong{SAME_PARITY} if the gather connects even sites to even sites
and odd sites to odd sites.  Use @strong{SWITCH_PARITY} if the gather
connects even sites to odd sites and vice versa.  Use
@strong{SCRAMBLE_PARITY} if the gather connects some even sites to even
sites and some even sites to odd sites.  If you have specified
@strong{NO_EVEN_ODD} for @kbd{want_even_odd}, then the
@kbd{parity_conserve} argument does nothing.  Otherwise, it is used by
@kbd{make_gather()} to help avoid making redundant lists.

@kbd{make_gather()} returns an integer, which can then be used as the
@kbd{direction} argument to @kbd{start_gather()}.  If an inverse
gather is also requested, its @kbd{direction} will be one more than
the value returned by @kbd{make_gather()}.  In other words, if
@kbd{make_gather()} returns 10, then to gather using the inverse mapping
you would use 11 as the direction argument in start_gather.

Notice that the nearest neighbor gathers do not have their inverse
directions numbered this convention.  Instead, they are sorted so that
@strong{OPP_DIR}(@kbd{direction}) gives the gather using the inverse
mapping.


Now for some examples which hopefully clarify all this.

First, suppose we wished to set up nearest neighbor gathers.  (Ordinarily.
 @kbd{make_comlinks()} already does this for you, but it is a
good example.)  The function which defines the mapping is basically
@kbd{neighbor_coords()}, with a wrapper which fixes up the arguments.
@kbd{arg} should be set to the address of the direction ---
@strong{XUP}, etc.
@example
/* The function which defines the mapping */
neighbor_temp(x,y,z,t, arg, forw_back, xpt, ypt, zpt, tpt)
  int x,y,z,t;
  int *arg;
  int forw_back;
  int *xpt,*ypt,*zpt,*tpt;
@{
  register int dir; /* local variable */
  dir = *arg;
  if(forw_back==BACKWARDS)dir=OPP_DIR(dir);
  neighbor_coords(x,y,z,t,dir,xpt,ypt,zpt,tpt);
@}

/* Code fragment to set up the gathers */
/* Do this once, in the setup part of the program. */
int xup_dir, xdown_dir;
int temp;
temp = XUP; /* we need the address of XUP */
xup_dir = make_gather( neighbor_temp, &temp, WANT_INVERSE,
                       ALLOW_EVEN_ODD, SWITCH_PARITY);
xdown_dir = xup_dir+1;

/* Now you can start gathers */
start_gather( F_OFFSET(phi), sizeof(su3_vector), xup_dir, EVEN,
              gen_pt[0] );
/* and use wait_gather, cleanup_gather as always. */
@end example

Again, once it is set up it works just as before.  Essentially, you are
just defining new @kbd{directions}.  Again, @kbd{make_comlinks()} does
the same thing, except that it arranges the directions so that you can
just use @strong{XUP}, @strong{XDOWN}, etc. as the @kbd{direction}
argument to @kbd{start_gather()}.

A second example is for a gather from a general displacement.  You
might, for example, set up a bunch of these to take care of the link
gathered from the second mearest neighbor in evaluating the plaquette in
the pure gauge code.  In this example, the mapping function needs a list
of four arguments --- the displacement in each of four directions.  Notice
that for this displacement even sites connect to even sites, etc.
@example
/* The function which defines the mapping */
/* arg is a four element array, with the four displacements */
general_displacement(x,y,z,t, arg, forw_back, xpt, ypt, zpt, tpt)
  int x,y,z,t;
  int *arg;
  int forw_back;
  int *xpt,*ypt,*zpt,*tpt;
@{
    if( forw_back==FORWARDS ) @{ /* add displacement */
       *xpt = (x+nx+arg[0])%nx;
       *ypt = (y+ny+arg[1])%ny;
       *zpt = (z+nz+arg[2])%nz;
       *tpt = (t+nt+arg[3])%nt;
    @}
    else @{ /* subtract displacement */
       *xpt = (x+nx-arg[0])%nx;
       *ypt = (y+ny-arg[1])%ny;
       *zpt = (z+nz-arg[2])%nz;
       *tpt = (t+nt-arg[3])%nt;
    @}
@}

/* Code fragment to set up the gathers */
/* Do this once, in the setup part of the program. */
/* In this example, I set up to gather from displacement -1 in
   the x direction and +1 in the y direction */
int plus_x_minus_y;
int disp[4];
disp[0] = -1;
disp[1] = +1;
disp[2] = 0;
disp[3] = 0;
plus_x_minus_y = make_gather( general_displacement, disp,
                              NO_INVERSE, ALLOW_EVEN_ODD, SAME_PARITY);

/* Now you can start gathers */
start_gather( F_OFFSET(link[YUP]), sizeof(su3_matrix), plus_x_minus_y,
              EVEN, gen_pt[0] );
/* and use wait_gather, cleanup_gather as always. */
@end example

Finally, we would set up an FFT butterfly  roughly as
follows.  Here the function wants two arguments: the direction of the
butterfly and the level.
@example
/* The function which defines the mapping */
/* arg is a two element array, with the direction and level */
butterfly_map(x,y,z,t, arg, forw_back, xpt, ypt, zpt, tpt)
  int x,y,z,t;
  int *arg;
  int forw_back;
  int *xpt,*ypt,*zpt,*tpt;
@{
int direction,level;
    direction = arg[0];
    level = arg[1];
    /* Rest of code goes here */
@}

/* Code fragment to set up the gathers */
/* Do this once, in the setup part of the program. */
int butterfly_dir[5]; /* for nx=16 */
int args[2];
args[0]=XUP;
for( level=1; level<=4; level++ ) @{
    args[1]=level;
    butterfly_dir[level] = make_gather( butterfly_map, args,
       OWN_INVERSE, NO_EVEN_ODD, SCRAMBLE_PARITY);
@}
/* similarly for y,z,t directions */
@end example

@cindex iPSC-860
@cindex Intel Paragon
@cindex interupts

The code was originally designed with functions to provide a general way
of accessing fields at any site.  However, they require the ability for
one node to interupt another. So far as we know, this works reliably on 
the iPSC-860, unreliably on the Intel Paragon, and not at all on most
other parallel machines. So we actually don't use the following routines.
However, for historical purposes, and in anticipation of better hardware
in the future, we include the following notes on arbitrary data access
across the nodes.

To set up the interrupt handlers required by the @kbd{field_pointer}
routines, call @kbd{start_handlers()} in the setup part of the program.
@example
/* "field_pointer_at_coordinates()" returns a pointer to a field in
    the lattice given its coordinates. */ 
char * field_pointer_at_coordinates( field, size, x,y,z,t );
  /* arguments */
  field_offset field; /* offset of one of the fields in lattice[] */
  int size;           /* size of the field in bytes */
  int x,y,z,t;        /* coordinates of point to get field from */

/* "field_pointer_at_direction()" returns a pointer to a field in the
    lattice at a direction from a given site. */ char *
field_pointer_at_direction( field,size, s, direction );
  /* arguments */
  int field;         /* offset of one of the fields in lattice[] */
  int size;          /* size of the field in bytes */
  site *s;           /* pointer to a site on this node */
  int direction;     /* direction of site's neighbor to get data from. */

/* "cleanup_field_pointer()" frees the buffers that field_pointer...
    allocated. */ 
void cleanup_field_pointer(char *buf);
@end example
An example of the usage of these routines is:
@example
su3_matrix *pt; int x,y,z,t; 
/* set x,y,z,t to the coordinates of the desited site here, then: */

  pt = (su3_matrix *)field_pointer_at_coordinates( F_OFFSET(xlink),
                                                   sizeof(su3_matrix),
                                                   x,y,z,t );

/* now "pt" points to the xlink at the site whose coordinates are
   x,y,z,t. It may point either to the original data or a copy.
   Use it for whatever you want, and when you are done with it: */

  cleanup_field_pointer( (char *)pt );

/* subsequent calls to malloc may overwrite *pt, so don't use it any
   more */
@end example




@node Distributing sites among nodes, Reading and Writing Lattices, Details of gathers and creating new ones, Programming with MILC Code
@section Distributing sites among nodes
@cindex Distributing sites among nodes

Four functions are used to determine the distribution of @kbd{sites}
among the parallel @emph{nodes}.

@kbd{setup_layout()} is called once on each node at initialization time,
to do any calculation and set up any static variables that the other
functions may need.  At the time @kbd{setup_layout()} is called the
global variables @kbd{nx,ny,nz} and @kbd{nt} (the lattice dimensions)
will have been set.  
@sp 1

@kbd{setup_layout()} must initialize the global variables:
@example
sites_on_node, 
even_sites_on_node, 
odd_sites_on_node.
@end example
@sp 1

The following functions are available for node/site reference:
@table @kbd
@item num_sites(node) 
returns the number of sites on a node
@item node_number(x,y,z,t) 
returns the node number on which a site lives.
@item node_index(x,y,z,t)
returns the index of the site on the node.
@end table
Thus, the site at @kbd{x,y,z,t} is @kbd{lattice[node_index(x,y,z,t)]}.

 These functions may be changed, but
chaos will ensue if they are not consistent. For example, it is a gross
error for the @kbd{node_index} function to return a value larger than or
equal to the value returned by @kbd{num_sites} of the appropriate node.
In fact, @kbd{node_index} must provide a one-to-one mapping of the
coordinates of the @kbd{sites} on one node to the integers from 0 to
@kbd{num_sites(node)-1}.


A good choice of site distribution on nodes will minimize the amount of
communication.  These routines are in @file{layout_XXX.c}. There are
currently several layout strategies to choose from; select one in your
@file{Makefile} (@pxref{Building the MILC Code}).
@table @file
@item  layout_hyper.c
Divides the lattice up into hypercubes by dividing dimensions by factors
of two.  Fails if there aren't enough powers of two in the dimensions.
This is pretty much our standard layout these days.

@item  layout_timeslices.c
This version puts entire timeslices on nodes. It requires that @kbd{nt},
   the time extent, is a multiple of the number of nodes used.
   We hope this speeds up spatial FFT's.

@item  layout_timeslices_2.c
This version puts entire timeslices on nodes, if it can. It requires that
  @kbd{nt},
   the time extent, is a multiple of the number of nodes used, or
   that the number of nodes be a multiple of @kbd{nt}, and that @kbd{z}
 be divisble by the
   factor.
   We hope this speeds up spatial FFT's.

@item layout_hyper_2or3.c
 This version divides the lattice by factors of three or two in any of the
   four directions.  It prefers to divide the longest dimensions,
   which mimimizes the area of the surfaces.  Similarly, it prefers
   to divide dimensions which have already been divided, thus not
   introducing more off-node directions.
     First the code will look for dimensions that can be divided by
        three, then it will look for dimensions that can be divided by two.
   This requires that the lattice volume be divisible by the number
   of nodes, which is a (power of three)*(power of two).

@item layout_hyper_sl32.c
Version for 32 sublattices, for extended actions.
This version divides the lattice by factors of two in any of the
   four directions.  It prefers to divide the longest dimensions,
   which mimimizes the area of the surfaces.  Similarly, it prefers
   to divide dimensions which have already been divided, thus not
   introducing more off-node directions.
 This requires that the lattice volume be divisible by the number
   of nodes, which is a power of two.
@end table

Below is a completely simple example, which just deals out the sites
among nodes like cards in a deck.  It works, but you would really want
to do much better.
@example
int Num_of_nodes; /* static storage used by these routines */

void setup_layout() @{
  Num_of_nodes = numnodes();
  sites_on_node = nx*ny*nz*nt/Num_of_nodes;
  even_sites_on_node = odd_sites_on_node = sites_on_node/2; 
@}

int node_number(x,y,z,t) 
int x,y,z,t; 
@{
  register int i;
  i = x+nx*(y+ny*(z+nz*t));
  return( i%Num_of_nodes ); 
@}

int node_index(x,y,z,t) 
int x,y,z,t; 
@{
  register int i;
  i = x+nx*(y+ny*(z+nz*t));
  return( i/Num_of_nodes ); 
@}

int num_sites(node) 
int node; 
@{ 
  register int i;
  i = nx*ny*nz*nt;
  if( node< i%Num_of_nodes ) return( i/Num_of_nodes+1 );
  else return( i/Num_of_nodes ); 
@}
@end example

@example
/* utility function for finding coordinates of neighbor */ 
/* x,y,z,t are the coordinates of some site, and x2p... are
   pointers.  *x2p... will be set to the coordinates of the
   neighbor site at direction "dir".

neighbor_coords( x,y,z,t,dir, x2p,y2p,z2p,t2p)
  int x,y,z,t,dir; /* coordinates of site, and direction (eg XUP) */
  int *x2p,*y2p,*z2p,*t2p;
@end example

@node Reading and Writing Lattices, Random numbers, Distributing sites among nodes, Programming with MILC Code
@section Reading and writing lattices
@cindex  Reading and writing lattices

Our gauge configuration file format includes a companion ASCII
information file with standardized fields to describe the parameters
that went into creating the configuration.  Two binary formats are
produced: one, a single file with site data in typewriter order and one,
a single file with data in node-dump order for the fastest parallel I/O
checkpoint files.  Although the checkpoint files are designed to be read
efficiently onto the same layout and number of nodes, they can be read
to any configuration with some penalty in time, of course.  There is a
single, multi-purpose binary lattice I/O routine "@kbd{io_lat4.c}" that
handles all lattice formats in current use, (with the exception of some
of the peculiar checkpoint formats) and an architecture-specific choice
of parallel I/O wrappers: @kbd{io_paragon2.c}, @kbd{io_ansi.c},
@kbd{io_piofs.c}, @kbd{io_nonansi.c}, @kbd{io_romio.c} (for MPI-2
parallel writes and reads). The new format includes a 64-bit checksum.
All binary restore routines accept all version 4, 5 and 6 formats,
including the checkpoint format, except that propagator multidump files
must be restored to the same number of nodes with propagator multidump
routines.

Input and output are set at run time.
Here is a summary of the I/O choices:

@table @kbd
@item  reload_ascii
@item   reload_serial 
   Binary read by node 0
@item   reload_parallel
  Binary read by all nodes.  Only where hardware is available.
@item   save_ascii

@item   save_serial 
     Binary through node 0 - standard index order
@item   save_parallel
    Binary parallel - standard index order.  Only where hardware is available.
@item   save_checkpoint 
 Binary parallel - node dump order
@item   save_serial_archive
    NERSC Gauge Connection format.  For the moment a parallel version
    is not available.
@end table

One can also read in or write Wilson-type variables (such as
propagators).  The Wilson/clover propagator file format is similar to
the gauge configuration file format.  A companion ASCII information file
is also produced and there are three formats - one in standard
typewriter order, one in node-dump format for checkpointing, and a
third, multiple files, one per node (@kbd{multidump} format).  The first
two formats are designed for files that can be archived.  The third is
intended for fast temporary I/O to local disks private to each node, and
is not suitable for archiving.  Separate checksums are generated for
each source spin and color.  The checksum feature is not implemented yet
under the Intel nx system for the Paragon.  The I/O choices are
identical to the lattice choices, except there is no "old_binary"
format.  All propagator I/O parameter-file commands have the suffix
"@kbd{_prop}", as in "@kbd{reload_parallel_prop}", to distinguish them
from gauge configuration commands.

The options are identical to the ones for gauge fields.

Usually one writes out three source colors and four source spins worth
of Wilson vectors (making a complete Wilson propagator). However, an
arbitrary number can be written. @kbd{ io_wb3.c} allocates file space in
blocks of three source colors, but you can have as many or as few source
"spins" as you want: just change the @kbd{build_w_prop_hdr} routine in
the application directory, and the @kbd{n_spins} variable in
@kbd{lattice.h}.  See, for example, @kbd{clover_invert/clover_info.c}.
The advantage of this approach is that you can recall the Wilson vectors
in any order you want from the file by just specifying the "spin" and
"color".  And if you try to recall a "spin" that isn't there, you get an
error message.

To print out variables for debugging purposes, the library routines
@kbd{dumpvec}, @kbd{dumpmat} and @kbd{dump_wvec} (for SU(3) vectors,
SU(3) matrices and Wilson vectors) are quite useful:

@example

          FORALLSITES(i,s) @{
        if(magsq_wvec(&(s->psi)) > 1.e-10) @{
        printf("%d %d %d %d\n", s->x, s->y, s->z,s->t);
        printf("psi\n");
        dump_wvec(&(s->psi));
        @}
    @}
@end example




@node Random numbers, A Sample Applications Directory, Reading and Writing Lattices, Programming with MILC Code
@section Random numbers
@cindex Random numbers

The random number generator is the exclusive-OR of a 127 bit feedback
shift register and a 32 bit integer congruence generator.  It is
supposed to be machine independent.  Each node or site uses a different
multipler in the congruence generator and different initial state in the
shift register, so all are generating different
sequences of numbers.  If @strong{SITERAND} is defined, each lattice
site has its own random number generator state.  This takes extra
storage, but means that the results of the program will be independent
of the number of nodes or the distribution of the sites among the nodes.
The random number routine is @kbd{generic/ranstuff.c}.


@node A Sample Applications Directory, Bugs and features, Random numbers, Programming with MILC Code
@section A Sample Applications Directory
@cindex A Sample Applications Directory

An example of
the files which make up an application are listed here.  This list depends
very much on which application of the program (Kogut-Susskind/Wilson?
Thermodynamics/Spectrum?) is being built. The listing here is for a bare
bones Kogut-Susskind application.
@table @file
@item Make_template:
	Contains instructions for compiling and linking. 
	Three routines you can make, "su3_rmd", "su3_phi" and "su3_hmc",
	 are programs for the R algorithm, the phi algorithm, or
        the hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm. Used with Make_MACHINE, for
a machine-dependent target.
@end table
@sp 1

@strong{SOME HIGH LEVEL ROUTINES:}
@table @file
@item control.c
	main procedure - directs traffic.
	It must call initialize_machine() first thing.
@item setup.c
	most of the initialization stuff - called from control.c
@item update.c
	update the gauge fields by refreshing the momenta and
        integrating
	for one trajectory.  Knows three different algorithms through
	preprocessor switches.
@item update_h.c
	Update the gauge momenta
@item update_u.c
	Update the gauge fields
@item grsource.c
	Heat bath update of the phi field - "Gaussian random source"
@item d_congrad5.c
	A Kogut-Susskind inverter (kept in @kbd{generic_ks})
@item ks_multicg.c
	A Kogut-Susskind multimass CG inverter (kept in @kbd{generic_ks})
@item reunitarize2.c
	Reunitarize the gauge fields (kept in @kbd{generic_ks})
@item action.c
	Measure the action.  Used only in the hybrid Monte Carlo
        algorithm.
@item ranmom.c
	Produce Gaussian random momenta for the gauge fields.
(kept in @kbd{generic_ks})
@item plaquette3.c or plaquette4.c
	Measure the plaquette.  
@item ploop3.c
	Measure Polyakov loop (kept in @kbd{generic}) (n.b. the
@kbd{ploop} and @kbd{plaquette} routines may need elements of the 
@kbd{site} structure which you have not defined--such as @kbd{tempmat1}
and @kbd{tempmat2}.)
@item f_measure.c
	Measure fermion stuff - psi-bar-psi, fermion energy and
        pressure.
@item spectrum.c
	Measure hadron propagators
@item spectrum_s.c
	Measure hadron screening propagators
@item gaugefix.c
@item gaugefix2.c
	Fix to lattice Landau or Coulomb (in any direction) gauge
(kept in @kbd{generic})
@end table
@sp 1

@strong{HEADERS}
@table @file
@item lattice.h
    Required. Defines the site structure and global variables.
@item defines.h
    Required. Local macros common to all targets in an application.
    SITERAND should be defined here.  Other macros that are independent of
    the site structure can also be defined here.
@item params.h
    Required. Defines the parameter structure used in @kbd{setup.c} for passing
    input parameters to the nodes.
@item ks_dyn_includes.h
    Function prototypes for all files in the @kbd{ks_dynamical} application directory.
@end table
@sp 1

@strong{LOWER LEVEL ROUTINES}
@table @file
@item ranstuff.c
	Routines for random numbers on multiple nodes:
	@kbd{initialize_prn()} and @kbd{myrand()}
@item layout_XXX.c 
	Routines which tell which node a site lives on, and where on
	the node it lives.
@item com_XXX.c
	Communication routines - gather, @kbd{field_pointer}, setup routines
	for communications.  These are very machine dependent.
	Choose the appropriate one for your target machine.
@item io_lat.c,
	Input and output routines - read and write lattices.
	Some optimized versions for special machines exist such as
         @file{io_paragon.c}.
@sp 1
@end table
@sp 1

@strong{LIBRARIES}
@table @file
@item complex.a
	complex number operations.  See section on "Library routines".
@item su3.a
	3x3 matrix and 3 component vector operations.  See "utility
	subroutines".
@end table


@node Bugs and features, , A Sample Applications Directory, Programming with MILC Code
@section Bugs and features
@cindex Bugs and features
@cindex i860 assembler
@cindex doubleword boundaries


Some variants of the version 4 MILC code had library routines and
applications for doing SU(2) gauge theory. This code has not been
translated into version 6 conventions.

The MILC code is hard-wired for four dimensional simulations.
Three and five dimensional variants are believed to exist, but are not
maintained by us.

For some unknown reason, lost in the mists of time,
 the MILC code uses the opposite convention for the projectors
@tex
$$S = \sum_x \bar \psi(x) \psi(x) - \kappa(
 \sum_\mu \bar \psi(x) (1+\gamma_\mu)U_\mu(x) \psi(x+\mu) +
 \sum_\mu \bar \psi(x+\mu) (1-\gamma_\mu)U_\mu^\dagger(x) \psi(x)) $$
@end tex
rather than the more standard convention
@tex
$$ S = \sum_x \bar \psi(x) \psi(x) - \kappa(
 \sum_\mu \bar \psi(x) (1-\gamma_\mu)U_\mu(x) \psi(x+\mu) ) +
 \sum_\mu \bar \psi(x+\mu) (1+\gamma_\mu)U_\mu^\dagger(x) \psi(x) ) $$
@end tex
Furthermore, the sign convention for 
@tex $\gamma_2$ 
@end tex 
is minus the standard convention.  Thus the MILC spinor fields differ
from the ``conventional'' ones by a gamma-5 multiplication
@tex $\psi_{MILC}= \gamma_5 \psi_{usual}$. 
@end tex
and a reflection in the x-z plane.
  MILC uses Weyl-basis (gamma-5 diagonal)
 Dirac matrices.

@node Writing Your Own Application, Precision, Programming with MILC Code, Top
@chapter Writing Your Own Application
@cindex Writing Your Own Application

Each application typically uses at least four header files,
@kbd{APP_includes.h}, @kbd{lattice.h}, @kbd{defines.h} and
@kbd{params.h}. The first contains definitions of all the routines in
the application directory; the second contains a list of global macros
and global definitions and a specification of the @kbd{site} structure
(all the variables living on the sites of your lattice); the third
contains local macros common to all targets in an application; and the
last defines the parameter structure used for passing input parameters
to the nodes.  The application directory also has its own makefile,
@kbd{Make_template}, which contains all the (machine-independent)
dependencies necessary for your applications.

It is customary to put the @kbd{main()} routine in a file which begins with
the word ``control'' (e.g. @kbd{control_clov_p.c}). Beyond that, you are
on your own. If you poke around, you may find a routine similar
to the one you want to write, which you can modify. A typical application
reads in a lattice 
reads in some input parameters,
does things to variables on every site,
moves information from site to site (@pxref{Accessing fields at other sites})
and
writes out a lattice at the end.

One problem is how to read in global parameters (like a coupling
or the number of iterations of a process). This is done in a file with
a name similar to @kbd{setup.c}. To read in a global variable and
broadcast it to all the nodes, you must first edit @kbd{lattice.h}
adding the variable to the list of globals
 (in the long set of @kbd{EXTERN}'s
at the top), and edit the @kbd{params.h} file to
add it to the @kbd{params} structure. Next, in @kbd{setup.c},
add a set of lines to prompt for the input,
and find the place where the @kbd{params} structure is initialized or read.
Add your variable once to each list, to put it into @kbd{par_buf},
and then to extract it. Good luck!

@node Precision, Index, Writing Your Own Application, Top
@chapter Precision
@cindex Precision

As shipped, the MILC code does all calcuations in single precision
with a few exceptions (e.g. double precision accumulation of global
sums).  A clumsy hack is provided for converting the entire code to
double precision.  To make the conversion, copy the entire code to a
new directory tree.  Then run the script @kbd{convert_f2d.sh}, found
in the top level directory.  This script edits all files in place,
changing all occurrences of @kbd{float} to @kbd{double}, with some
selected exceptions.  Since our binary file formats are all single
precision, special care is required to read and write them in a double
precision environment.  In the generic directory, the files
@kbd{io_lat4_double.c} and @kbd{io_wb3_double.c} provide this
capability.  This script also replaces @kbd{io_lat4.o} and
@kbd{io_wb3.o} with their double-precision equivalents in all
@kbd{Make_template} files, so they will automatically be compiled and
linked when you build the double precision application.

Since we do not have double precision versions of the assembly code,
the double precision libraries must be built with @kbd{Make_vanilla},
rather than the architecture specific @kbd{Make_RS6K},
@kbd{Make_alpha}, or @kbd{Make_t3e}.

@node Index,  , Precision, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp
@page

@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr
@page
@contents

@bye


